Hercule Poirot is vacationing in Aswan, waiting to board the steamer Karnak, which will tour along the Nile River from Shellal to Wadi Halfa. He is approached by wealthy heiress Linnet Doyle (née Ridgeway), who attempts to hire him. Linnet has recently married Simon Doyle, ex-fiancé of her former friend Jacqueline de Bellefort. Bitterly jealous, Jacqueline has taken to hounding and stalking the couple all throughout their honeymoon. Correctly suspecting that Linnet deliberately seduced Simon away from Jacqueline, Poirot refuses the commission, but privately makes an attempt to dissuade Jacqueline from "opening her heart to evil".

Simon and Linnet secretly follow Poirot to escape Jacqueline, but find she anticipated this move and boarded the steamer ahead of them. The other passengers include Linnet's maid Louise Bourget; her trustee Andrew Pennington; romance novelist Salome Otterbourne and her daughter Rosalie; young Tim Allerton and his mother; elderly American socialite Marie Van Schuyler, her cousin Cornelia Robson and nurse Miss Bowers; outspoken communist Mr Ferguson; Italian archaeologist Guido Richetti; solicitor Jim Fanthorp; and Austrian physician Dr Bessner.

While visiting Abu Simbel when the Karnak docks there, Linnet narrowly avoids being crushed to death by a large boulder that falls from a cliff. Jacqueline is initially suspected of causing the incident, but it is later discovered she never came ashore. At Wadi Halfa, Poirot's friend Colonel Race boards the Karnak for the return voyage. Race tells Poirot that there may be a secret political agitator among the passengers.

The next night, in the steamer's lounge, Jacqueline consumes several drinks, becomes angry, and shoots at Simon with a pistol. He collapses with a bloody leg, and she immediately becomes hysterical with remorse and kicks the gun away. The two other people present, Fanthorp and Cornelia, take her to her cabin. Simon is shortly brought to Dr Bessner's cabin for treatment for his injury. Fanthorp goes back to look for Jacqueline's pistol, but it has disappeared.

The following morning, Linnet is found dead with a small caliber bullet in her brain, while her valuable string of pearls has disappeared. Jacqueline's pistol is recovered from the Nile; it was wrapped in a velvet stole that Miss Van Schuyler had reported missing the day before. Two shots have been fired from the pistol.

While interviewing Louise in the cabin where Simon is resting, Poirot notes that she seems to be hinting that she knows something, while outwardly denying the fact. Miss Bowers returns what appears to be Linnet's pearl necklace, which Miss Van Schuyler, a kleptomaniac, stole. However, Poirot realises these pearls are imitation. He notes two nail polish bottles in the victim's room, one of which does not smell like polish. Louise is later found stabbed to death in her cabin. Mrs Otterbourne meets with Poirot, Race, and Simon, claiming she saw who killed the maid, to which Simon loudly declares his surprise. Someone outside the cabin shoots Mrs Otterbourne dead before she can say the killer's name.

Poirot soon confronts Pennington over his attempted murder of Linnet by pushing the boulder off the cliff; Pennington had speculated unsuccessfully with her inheritance, and came to Egypt upon learning of her marriage to trick her into signing documents that would exonerate him. However, he claims he did not murder anyone, despite his revolver being used in Mrs Otterbourne's murder. Poirot recovers Linnet's genuine pearls from Tim, whom he exposes as a professional thief. Tim had substituted an imitation string of pearls for the genuine necklace. Meanwhile, Race realizes Richetti is the man he is looking for.

Poirot tells Race, Bessner, and Cornelia that Simon killed Linnet. Jacqueline planned the murder, as the pair are still lovers. When Linnet deliberately tried to seduce Simon into leaving Jacqueline, Simon decided to go along with it so he could murder her for her money and marry Jacqueline later. Afraid of the none-too-bright Simon being caught and executed, Jacqueline concocted what she thought was a foolproof plan. On the night of the murder, Jacqueline deliberately missed Simon, who faked his leg injury with red ink. While Jacqueline distracted Fanthorp and Cornelia, Simon took the pistol, went to Linnet's cabin, and shot her. He placed the nail polish bottle that had contained the red ink on Linnet's washstand, then returned to the lounge and shot himself in the leg. Simon used the stole to silence the pistol, loaded a spare cartridge to make it seem that only two shots were fired, and threw the gun overboard.

Louise had witnessed Simon entering Linnet's cabin that night and hinted at this to Simon when Poirot was interviewing her, planning to blackmail him. Jacqueline, again in an attempt to protect her lover, stabbed Louise to death. Mrs Otterbourne saw Jacqueline entering Louise's cabin; when she went to tell Poirot, Simon had raised his voice to alert Jacqueline in the next room, and she shot Mrs Otterbourne to silence her. Poirot confronts Simon, who confesses. He is arrested, as are Jacqueline and Richetti. As the steamer arrives back in Shellal and the passengers disembark, Jacqueline shoots Simon and herself with another pistol so they may escape the gallows. When pressed, Poirot reveals he had always known she had a second pistol, but had chosen to allow her to take her own life.