A train arrives at the Old West town of Flagstone where a man with a harmonica (later dubbed "Harmonica") kills three men attempting to ambush him. Although Harmonica was expecting an outlaw named Frank, he concludes the men belonged to the outlaw Cheyenne's gang. Meanwhile, Frank and his gang murder Brett McBain and his three children as they prepare for a celebration at his ranch Sweetwater. Shortly after, a former prostitute arrives at Sweetwater and reveals she is Jill McBain, who married McBain a month earlier in New Orleans. Frank leaves evidence at the murder scene implicating Cheyenne. Jill searches for a motive behind the murders.

Railway tycoon Morton hired Frank to intimidate, not murder, McBain. McBain intended to profit by building a watering station on Sweetwater, knowing that the railroad from Flagstone would pass through his property. However, if the station was incomplete by the time the railroad reached Sweetwater, the property would revert to the railroad. McBain's murder puts Morton at odds with Frank, who desires the land for himself. Jill, as McBain's surviving widow, now owns Sweetwater.

Harmonica encounters Cheyenne, now a fugitive, who denies his men tried to ambush him. Harmonica saves Jill from two of Frank's men and spies out the railway carriage where Morton (owing to his spinal tuberculosis) is confined on crutches. Harmonica discovers the connection between Frank and Morton but is captured. Frank is called away and Cheyenne rescues Harmonica. The two collaborate to help Jill save Sweetwater, using stockpiled materials to start building a station.

After a threatening sexual encounter with Frank, Jill is forced to auction the land; however, Frank's henchmen intimidate bidders so Frank can buy it at a low price. Harmonica appears with Cheyenne in tow and bids $5,000, which is the bounty on Cheyenne as a wanted fugitive. Frank is unsuccessful in buying Harmonica out, and wonders why Harmonica is pursuing him. Morton bribes Frank's own men to kill him, but Harmonica intervenes to save Frank, due to having unfinished business with him.

Cheyenne escapes custody, and he and his gang engage Frank's remaining men in a gunfight on Morton's train. Except for Cheyenne, who heads to Sweetwater, everyone is killed, including Morton. Upon seeing the aftermath of the fight, Frank rides to Sweetwater, where Harmonica is waiting. Cheyenne arrived earlier, but remains inside the ranch house with Jill. Outside, Harmonica and Frank engage in a showdown. Through a flashback, it is revealed that Frank had once prepared to hang a man, forcing his younger brother to support him on his shoulders while playing a harmonica. Eventually, the boy collapsed, dooming his brother. Now Harmonica, the boy grown up, beats Frank to the draw and, as Frank lies dying, he pushes the harmonica into Frank's mouth.

After Harmonica and Cheyenne leave Sweetwater together, Cheyenne collapses and dies from a gunshot wound he received during the fight with Morton. Harmonica puts Cheyenne's body on his horse and rides off as Jill serves water to railroad workers.